Biometric auth (#1569)
OWASP/owasp-mstg: Document/0x05f-Testing-Local-Authentication.md

## Local Authentication on Android

During local authentication, an app authenticates the user against credentials stored locally on the device. In other words, the user "unlocks" the app or some inner layer of functionality by providing a valid PIN, password or biometric characteristics such as face or fingerprint, which is verified by referencing local data. Generally, this is done so that users can more conveniently resume an existing session with a remote service or as a means of step-up authentication to protect some critical function.

> As stated before in chapter [Mobile App Authentication Architectures](0x04e-Testing-Authentication-and-Session-Management.md): The tester should be aware that local authentication should always be enforced at a remote endpoint or based on a cryptographic primitive. Attackers can easily bypass local authentication if no data returns from the authentication process.

Reviewer: SG: https://github.com/OWASP/owasp-mstg/blob/master/style_guide.md#4-references-within-the-guide

```suggestion
As stated before in chapter "[Mobile App Authentication Architectures](0x04e-Testing-Authentication-and-Session-Management.md)": The tester should be aware that local authentication should always be enforced at a remote endpoint or based on a cryptographic primitive. Attackers can easily bypass local authentication if no data returns from the authentication process.
```

#### Dynamic Analysis

Validate the duration of time (seconds) for which the key is authorized to be used after the user is successfully authenticated. This is only needed if `setUserAuthenticationRequired` is used.

### Testing Biometric Authentication (MSTG-AUTH-8)

#### Overview

> Biometric authentication allows a convenient mechanism for authentication, but also introduces additional attack surface when using it. The Android developer documentation gives an interesting overview and indicators for [measuring biometric unlock security](https://source.android.com/security/biometric/measure#strong-weak-unlocks "Measuring Biometric Unlock Security").

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Biometric authentication is a convenient mechanism for authentication, but also introduces an additional attack surface when using it. The Android developer documentation gives an interesting overview and indicators for [measuring biometric unlock security](https://source.android.com/security/biometric/measure#strong-weak-unlocks "Measuring Biometric Unlock Security").
```

> On the Android platform there are three different classes available for biometric authentication:

Reviewer: turned more active 
```suggestion
The Android platform offers three different classes for biometric authentication:
```

> - Android Q / 10 (API level 29) and higher: `BiometricManager`

Reviewer: SG and as in 0x5a:
```suggestion
- Android 10 (API level 29) and higher: `BiometricManager`
```

Author: Yes, you are right, but I put this in there on purpose, as the Screenshot above is using "Android Q", so it's easier to reference to this screenshot. Otherwise you are lost in the Android version jungle. Therefore I would keep it like it is and make an exception. Ok for you?

Reviewer: Aha, I see. Yes then I'm also fine with it :)

> - Android P / 9 (API level 28) and higher: `BiometricPrompt`

Reviewer: SG and as in 0x5a:
```suggestion
- Android 9 (API level 28) and higher: `BiometricPrompt`
```

Author: see above comment

Reviewer: Same here. understood :)

> - Android 6.0 (API level 23) and higher: `FingerprintManager` (deprecated in Android P)

Reviewer: SG and as in 0x5a:
```suggestion
- Android 6.0 (API level 23) and higher: `FingerprintManager` (deprecated in Android 9)
```

<img src="Images/Chapters/0x05f/biometricprompt-architecture.png" width="500" alt="Biometric Auth in Android">

> The class [BiometricManager](https://developer.android.com/reference/kotlin/android/hardware/biometrics/BiometricManager "BiometricManager") can be used to verify if biometric hardware is available on the device and configured by the user. If that's the case, the class [BiometricPrompt] can be used to show a system-provided biometric dialog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The class [`BiometricManager`](https://developer.android.com/reference/kotlin/android/hardware/biometrics/BiometricManager "BiometricManager") can be used to verify if biometric hardware is available on the device and if it's configured by the user. If that's the case, the class [`BiometricPrompt`](https://developer.android.com/reference/kotlin/android/hardware/biometrics/BiometricPrompt "BiometricPrompt") can be used to show a system-provided biometric dialog.
```

The `BiometricPrompt` class is a significant improvement, as it allows to have a consistent UI for biometric authentication on Android and also supports more sensors than just fingerprint.

> This is different to the `FingerprintManager` class that provided no UI and developers needed to build their own fingerprint UI and only fingerprint sensors are supported.

Reviewer: Slightly re-phrased to improve the flow and implication regarding concepts UI/sensors.
```suggestion
This is different to the `FingerprintManager` class which only supports fingerprint sensors and provides no UI, forcing developers to build their own fingerprint UI.
```

A very detailed overview and explanation of the Biometric API on Android was published on the [Android Developer Blog](https://android-developers.googleblog.com/2019/10/one-biometric-api-over-all-android.html "One Biometric API Over all Android").

> ##### FingerprintManager (deprecated in Android P)

Reviewer: SG
```suggestion
##### FingerprintManager (deprecated in Android 9)
```

> Android 6.0 (API level 23) introduced public APIs for authenticating users via fingerprint, but is deprecated in Android 9 (API level 28). Access to the fingerprint hardware is provided through the [FingerprintManager class](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/hardware/fingerprint/ "FingerprintManager"). An app can request fingerprint authentication by instantiating a `FingerprintManager` object and calling its `authenticate` method. The caller registers callback methods to handle possible outcomes of the authentication process (i.e. success, failure, or error). Note that this method doesn't constitute strong proof that fingerprint authentication has actually been performed - for example, the authentication step could be patched out by an attacker, or the "success" callback could be overloaded using dynamic instrumentation.

Reviewer: SG -> `FingerprintManager`
```suggestion
Android 6.0 (API level 23) introduced public APIs for authenticating users via fingerprint, but is deprecated in Android 9 (API level 28). Access to the fingerprint hardware is provided through the [`FingerprintManager`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/hardware/fingerprint/ "FingerprintManager") class. An app can request fingerprint authentication by instantiating a `FingerprintManager` object and calling its `authenticate` method. The caller registers callback methods to handle possible outcomes of the authentication process (i.e. success, failure, or error). Note that this method doesn't constitute strong proof that fingerprint authentication has actually been performed - for example, the authentication step could be patched out by an attacker, or the "success" callback could be overloaded using dynamic instrumentation.
```

> Better security is achieved by using the fingerprint API in conjunction with the Android `KeyGenerator` class. With this method, a symmetric key is stored in the `KeyStore` and "unlocked" with the user's fingerprint. For example, to enable user access to a remote service, an AES key is created which encrypts the authentication token. By calling `setUserAuthenticationRequired(true)` when creating the key, it is ensured that the user must re-authenticate to retrieve it. The encrypted authentication token can then be saved directly on the the device (e.g. via `SharedPreferences`). This design is a relatively safe way to ensure the user actually entered an authorized fingerprint. Note however that this setup requires the app to hold the symmetric key in memory during cryptographic operations, potentially exposing it to attackers that manage to access the app's memory during runtime.

Reviewer: - first sentence turned active.
- changed to Shared Preferences because we refer to it here a a storage method and not directly the class right. It could also be. But I feel this more appropriate, what do you think? 

```suggestion
You can achieve better security by using the fingerprint API in conjunction with the Android `KeyGenerator` class. With this approach, a symmetric key is stored in the Android KeyStore and unlocked with the user's fingerprint. For example, to enable user access to a remote service, an AES key is created which encrypts the authentication token. By calling `setUserAuthenticationRequired(true)` when creating the key, it is ensured that the user must re-authenticate to retrieve it. The encrypted authentication token can then be saved directly on the the device (e.g. via Shared Preferences). This design is a relatively safe way to ensure the user actually entered an authorized fingerprint. However, note that this setup requires the app to hold the symmetric key in memory during cryptographic operations, potentially exposing it to attackers that manage to access the app's memory during runtime.
```

Reviewer: Question: Is it the "symmetric key" or the "authentication token" that is exposed in memory? It is not that all keys from the KeyStore never leave it even when performing crypto operations. However the result of decrypting the "authentication token" will be exposed in memory, right?

Author: You are right, good spot! Will update this accordingly

Author: I removed the sentences completely. Keys in the Keystore are not exportable https://developer.android.com/training/articles/keystore

See commit: https://github.com/OWASP/owasp-mstg/pull/1569/commits/5c56dfefccab06624f9acc02574d0f803fe50d8b

An even more secure option is using asymmetric cryptography. Here, the mobile app creates an asymmetric key pair in the KeyStore and enrolls the public key on the server backend. Later transactions are then signed with the private key and verified by the server using the public key. The advantage of this is that transactions can be signed using KeyStore APIs without ever extracting the private key from the KeyStore. Consequently, it is impossible for attackers to obtain the key from memory dumps or by using instrumentation.

#### Static Analysis

> Note that there are quite some SDKs provided by vendors, which should provide biometric support, but which have their own insecurities. Be very cautious when using third party SDKs to handle sensitive authentication logic.

Reviewer: to avoid repeating provide*.
```suggestion
Note that there are quite some vendor/third party SDKs, which provide biometric support, but which have their own insecurities. Be very cautious when using third party SDKs to handle sensitive authentication logic.
```

The following sections explain the different biometric authentication classes.

##### Biometric Library

> A library called [Biometric](https://developer.android.com/jetpack/androidx/releases/biometric "Biometric library for Android") is available for Android that offers a compatibility version of the `BiometricPrompt` and `BiometricManager` APIs, as implemented in Android 10, with full feature support back to Android 6.0 (API 23).

Reviewer: active
```suggestion
Android provides a library called [Biometric](https://developer.android.com/jetpack/androidx/releases/biometric "Biometric library for Android") which offers a compatibility version of the `BiometricPrompt` and `BiometricManager` APIs, as implemented in Android 10, with full feature support back to Android 6.0 (API 23).
```

> In the Android developer documentation, a reference implementation can be found on how to [Show a biometric authentication dialog](https://developer.android.com/training/sign-in/biometric-auth "Show a biometric authentication dialog").

Reviewer: active
```suggestion
You can find a reference implementation and instructions on how to [show a biometric authentication dialog](https://developer.android.com/training/sign-in/biometric-auth "Show a biometric authentication dialog") in the Android developer documentation.
```

> There are two `authenticate` methods available in the `BiometricPrompt` class. The difference is that one method is expecting a [CryptoObject](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/hardware/biometrics/BiometricPrompt.CryptoObject.html "CryptoObject"), which adds an additional layer of security for the biometric authentication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two `authenticate` methods available in the `BiometricPrompt` class. One of them expects a [`CryptoObject`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/hardware/biometrics/BiometricPrompt.CryptoObject.html "CryptoObject"), which adds an additional layer of security for the biometric authentication.
```

The authentication flow would be as follows when using CryptoObject:

- The app creates a key in the KeyStore with `setUserAuthenticationRequired` set to true and `setInvalidatedByBiometricEnrollment` set to -1.
- This key is used to encrypt information that is authenticating the user (e.g. session information or authentication token).

> - A valid set of biometrics must be presented before the key is released from the KeyStore to decrypt the data, which is validated through the authenticate method and the CryptoObject.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A valid set of biometrics must be presented before the key is released from the KeyStore to decrypt the data, which is validated through the `authenticate` method and the `CryptoObject`.
```

- This solution cannot be bypassed, even on rooted devices, as the key from the KeyStore can only be used after successful biometric authentication.

> If CryptoObject is not used as part of the authenticate method, it can be bypassed by using Frida. See the Dynamic Instrumentation section for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `CryptoObject` is not used as part of the authenticate method, it can be bypassed by using Frida. See the "Dynamic Instrumentation" section for more details.
```

Developers can use several [validation classes](https://source.android.com/security/biometric#validation "Validation of Biometric Auth") offered by Android to test the implementation of biometric authentication in their app.

##### FingerprintManager

> > The following section describes implementing biometric authentication by using the `FingerprintManager` class. Please keep in mind that this class is deprecated and the [Biometric library](https://developer.android.com/jetpack/androidx/releases/biometric "Biometric library for Android") should be used instead as a best practice. This section is just for reference, in case you come across such an implementation and need to analyse it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> This section describes how to implement biometric authentication by using the `FingerprintManager` class. Please keep in mind that this class is deprecated and the [Biometric library](https://developer.android.com/jetpack/androidx/releases/biometric "Biometric library for Android") should be used instead as a best practice. This section is just for reference, in case you come across such an implementation and need to analyse it.
```

    keyInfo.isUserAuthenticationRequirementEnforcedBySecureHardware();
```

> The following section describes how to do fingerprint authentication using a symmetric key pair.

Reviewer: It's not a section anymore, right? I suggest this change or removing the line completely.

```suggestion
The following describes how to do fingerprint authentication using a symmetric key pair.
```

}
```

> The following section describes how to do fingerprint authentication using an asymmetric key pair.

Reviewer: It's not a section anymore, right? I suggest this change or removing the line completely.

```suggestion
The following describes how to do fingerprint authentication using an asymmetric key pair.
```

##### Additional Security Features

Android 7.0 (API level 24) adds the `setInvalidatedByBiometricEnrollment(boolean invalidateKey)` method to `KeyGenParameterSpec.Builder`. When `invalidateKey` value is set to `true` (the default), keys that are valid for fingerprint authentication are irreversibly invalidated when a new fingerprint is enrolled. This prevents an attacker from retrieving they key even if they are able to enroll an additional fingerprint.

Android 8.0 (API level 26) adds two additional error codes:

- `FINGERPRINT_ERROR_LOCKOUT_PERMANENT`: The user has tried too many times to unlock their device using the fingerprint reader.
- `FINGERPRINT_ERROR_VENDOR` – A vendor-specific fingerprint reader error occurred.

##### Third party SDKs

> Make sure that fingerprint authentication and/or other types of biometric authentication happens based on the Android SDK and its APIs. If this is not the case, ensure that the alternative SDK has been properly vetted for any weaknesses. Make sure that the SDK is backed by the TEE/SE which unlocks a (cryptographic) secret based on the biometric authentication. This secret should not be unlocked by anything else, but a valid biometric entry. That way, it should never be the case that the fingerprint logic can be bypassed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure that fingerprint authentication and/or other types of biometric authentication are exclusively based on the Android SDK and its APIs. If this is not the case, ensure that the alternative SDK has been properly vetted for any weaknesses. Make sure that the SDK is backed by the TEE/SE which unlocks a (cryptographic) secret based on the biometric authentication. This secret should not be unlocked by anything else, but a valid biometric entry. That way, it should never be the case that the fingerprint logic can be bypassed.
```

#### Dynamic Analysis

F-Secure Labs has published a very detailed [blog article about the Android KeyStore and Biometric authentication](https://labs.f-secure.com/blog/how-secure-is-your-android-keystore-authentication "How Secure is your Android Keystore Authentication ?").

> As part of this research two Frida scripts were released, which can be used to test insecure implementations of biometric authentication and trying to bypass them:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As part of this research two Frida scripts were released, which can be used to test insecure implementations of biometric authentication and try to bypass them:
```

> - [Fingerprint bypass](https://github.com/FSecureLABS/android-keystore-audit/blob/master/frida-scripts/fingerprint-bypass.js "Fingerprint Bypass") - This Frida script will bypass authentication when the `CryptoObject` is not used in the `authenticate` method of the `BiometricPrompt` class. The authentication implementation relies on the callback `onAuthenticationSucceded` being called.

Reviewer: Changed as we are in a bulleted list which is not part of the `# References` section. 

```suggestion
- [Fingerprint bypass](https://github.com/FSecureLABS/android-keystore-audit/blob/master/frida-scripts/fingerprint-bypass.js "Fingerprint Bypass"): This Frida script will bypass authentication when the `CryptoObject` is not used in the `authenticate` method of the `BiometricPrompt` class. The authentication implementation relies on the callback `onAuthenticationSucceded` being called.
```

> - [Fingerprint bypass via exception handling](https://github.com/FSecureLABS/android-keystore-audit/blob/master/frida-scripts/fingerprint-bypass-via-exception-handling.js "Fingerprint bypass via exception handling") - This Frida script will attempt to bypass authentication when the `CryptoObject` is used, but used in an incorrect way. The detailed explanation can be found in the section "Crypto Object Exception Handling" in the blog post.

Reviewer: Changed as we are in a bulleted list which is not part of the `# References` section. 
```suggestion
- [Fingerprint bypass via exception handling](https://github.com/FSecureLABS/android-keystore-audit/blob/master/frida-scripts/fingerprint-bypass-via-exception-handling.js "Fingerprint bypass via exception handling"): This Frida script will attempt to bypass authentication when the `CryptoObject` is used, but used in an incorrect way. The detailed explanation can be found in the section "Crypto Object Exception Handling" in the blog post.
```
